We happen to work underwater, but that's just like on land, you drive to your site in a Jeep, we put on tanks, but we really are historians, classicists, and so that's what's, we think it would be better to be here on the main campus.
Then they said, now, how would you like it if we could bring you here as a full professor for, and by then I'd had a raise from INA to $15,000 a year with no fringe benefits.
And so they said something, I don't know what it was,
25,000 a year.
And this to me was overwhelming, I think I sort of probably gasped and sat back in my chair, and John Calhoun thought I was disappointed.
And so he said, well, what about 30?
And I went back again.
He said, how about 35?
And I think my starting salary here was 35,000 a year.
The records would show that, but I think that's what it was.
And then they said, and what would you do if we could come up with a nautical archaeology program with $100,000 a year?
And I said, I'd sell my wife and kids.
And I suddenly realized that engineers have no sense of humor.
They all looked at one another and at me like for $100,000 he'd sell his wife and children.
And so they said we would establish at Texas A&M a graduate program.
I said I wasn't interested in undergraduates because I thought they needed a broader background.
What we were doing was just too specialized.
I didn't think you should give a B.A.
in Nautical Archaeology.
You let the people get their B.A.s or B.S.s and something else.
and then come to us for a year for a master's degree.
And in those days, I thought, then go on and get a PhD in either classical archaeology or ancient history or art history or some related field that will allow you to continue to do this, but also let you get a job.
So this was going to be in the College of Geosciences in the Geography Department.
I don't think I met Campbell Pennington that time, but I did, of course, when I came here.
So I went to the telephone and I called Ann, back in Denver, Pennsylvania.
I said, guess what, I just doubled my salary.
Or more than doubled my salary.
Of course, with fringe benefits too.
However, I already had committed to starting the excavation that summer.
of the first shipwreck ever excavated carefully from the American War of Independence, and this was just before the bicentennial, so I thought we'd get a lot of mileage.
It was a shipwreck in Penobscot Bay, Maine, the defense, which was scuttled in a very
bad showing by the American fleet, which was greatly outnumbered just these few British ships that came in, but they sculled them.
Paul Revere was actually court-martial for this defeat, his role in it, whatever that was.
So we started an INA summer school there.
I got it set up, and then I put in charge Dave Switzer, who was head of the history department, I guess, at Plymouth State College, because he'd worked with us in Turkey, and I thought that he, being an American historian, would do a better job.
And then I went off to Turkey to excavate what at that time was the oldest pottery found in the sea from about 1600 B.C.
The Turkish government, because of the Cyprus War, had decided, the military, that they didn't want foreigners diving off their coast.
So they turned us down for the permit.
But Don Frye, who had also joined us by that time,
for $5,000 a year, gave up an associate, visiting an associate professorship in physics at some university, I've forgotten where now.
But he had taught at Robert College in Istanbul for seven or eight years, so he spoke some Turkish, and he dived with me as a volunteer.
He had joined us.
And so he went and negotiated this with the generals in Ankara for months.
And finally he said, all right, we'll let you come, but only if you do it with Turkish students, nobody else, just Turkish students and your basic team.
That proved to be a very, very lucky thing because one of those students was an engineering student named Jamal Pulak, who is now recognized as being one of the finest archaeologists in the world and is on the Texas A&M faculty.
It took me about five years to convince him to give up a lucrative career as an engineer and throw in his lot with archaeology.
And I think some days he resents me still because here he is pushing 50 and he's just an assistant professor.
uh, whereas he saw his friends go out and have, you know, two cars in the garage within a very few years.
Um, then, uh, so we went to join the faculty in the fall of 1976.
In the meantime, Carl Clausen, our New World Archaeologist, had a lawsuit, I don't know the details of it, against the state, and of course the state said, we're not going to hire anybody that's suing us.
So Carl decided to leave Texas altogether, and the last night he stayed in Texas, he and his wife and two children stayed in our house at the bottom of Dominic Drive that we'd just bought, and
then went on to Florida.
And I should, this can be taken out if you think it's necessary.
I want to write someday a history, there's a lot of history that shouldn't be published in people's lifetime, but unfortunately, I don't know how it happened, but in a rage he shot his wife to death a few years ago.
And then it turned out he was a survivalist.
I didn't know that.
And he had food and guns stashed all through the woods and in caves and shot up a police car and wounded a policeman.
And so when he finally was caught, he's clearly never going to see the light of day again.
But that's the fellow that brought us here.
Just like the woman who got us our first permit to work in Turkey ended up getting her throat slit and thrown in the boss room.
So there are a lot of stories that
Shouldn't be told during his lifetime, I guess.
Describe you and your family and the other people coming with you.
What was it like to relocate to College Station?
I think that the best thing I ever did was I said to Ann, because we were... We were living in...
At that time, you know, we'd just been in Virginia and then we visited South Carolina and up in the mountains of North Carolina.
And so there were huge, big, huge, big trees.
And we didn't have tall trees.
And so I said to Ann, I said, there are no trees there.
There are no trees.
And it's all flat, because we love mountains in North Carolina.
And so she was pleasantly surprised.
She said, oh, George, there are trees here when we drove here.
So we and the Steffies drove down at the same time to look for houses to buy.
Oh, but in the meantime, in the meantime, this is important.
I went and spent that year, 75, 76, in Cambridge, England, because we didn't leave Turkey until October.
And we just drove to England and put our kids in school there.
And I could live more cheaply there than anywhere else.
I was still on this $15,000 salary.
So then we came and we did to come to College Station.
No, I'm sorry.
I've got my dates mixed up.
In 75, we did a defense in Maine.
In 76, we were invited to start another excavation, I'd left that one to someone else, of one of Cornwallis' wrecks in the York River, Virginia.
And then following that, that's the year we had all the Turkey students in 1976.
In 75, we didn't go to Turkey.
So in 1976, we started this Cornwallis wreck.
One of his ships that was scuttled is just before his defeat at the Battle of Yorktown.
sorry my dates I'm sorry 75 we did the defense then we went to Turkey and did this Bronze Age shipwreck met all the Turkish students and
then drove to England, then came back, went to Yorktown, and then came to College Station directly from there.
I was thinking we came from a place where there were a lot of trees, which is hardly that part of the Turkish coast.
And so Ann said, oh, there were a lot of trees.
And we stayed in the, I guess, the Holiday Inn, and the Steffies looked for a house to buy, and we looked for a house to buy.
Now, how could I afford a house?
Ann is the greatest wife one can imagine.
I don't even know what my salary is.
She takes care of all of our money.
So she didn't hide it from me, but she simply had not announced that when we sold our house in Philadelphia, she had put $10,000 away just for a rainy day.
And if we hadn't had that, we couldn't have made a down payment.
But we made a down payment of $10,000 on the house at the bottom of Dominic Drive.
And the staff said, we found a house.
We said, we found a house.
And it turned out they're just right around the corner from one another, about four houses apart.
So, Dick Steffi and I came in the fall of 1976 and we shared an office with a secretary plus an INA secretary in Bolton Hall as part of
the anthropology department, even though we were teaching in the geography department.
That's when I met Campbell Pennington and Ed Duran.
Now one of the things that made it coming here so pleasant is I already knew the name of Ed Duran because he, although he was not a diving archaeologist, he was a geographer, but he had an interest in ships and shipwrecks and was already teaching a course.
on ship archaeology, you might say, and certainly ship history when I got here.
Ed was unbelievably kind.
He immediately threw a nice reception for me in his house and introduced me to a lot of people.
And I met Campbell Pennington,
who lived not far from us, and so he became a very close friend, and he's now in his 80s.
I talked to him.
He's in a retirement cottage in Austin.
I talked to him, one of the first things after I got back from Turkey.
Vaughn Bryant was absolutely a wonderful department head, always sympathetic to what we were trying to do, but I'll never forget the first time I met him.
I'd come from the stuffy east, Ivy League University, where I wouldn't have set foot
even outside my house almost, without a coat and tie on.
And Ann and I were in the Holiday Inn having breakfast while we were house hunting, and in comes a fellow with Bermuda shorts and matching short-sleeved shirt, which was all Budweiser cans.
And he said, hello, I'm Paul and Brian.
at the anthropology department.
We were all younger in those days.
So we started teaching our classes and my library had been saved by Michael Katzev and some other people in Cyprus and Ann was able to leave, she left her baby grand behind, was able to sell that to the American ambassador in Cyprus who wanted it.
So my library arrived after it had been boxed up for several years and I was able to use that and that was basically what
was what our students had to use when we first arrived as my private books.
However, while I was in England, and that's, I keep getting off track, while I was in England, a negotiating team from INA came down
to Texas A.M.
to negotiate all the final details.
And this was Jack Kelly, the businessman, who helped me get started.
Alan Beghold, who was head of the classical department at Brown University, another founding director of I&A.
And then our pro bono Philadelphia lawyer, Jim Eisman, who had married a former student of mine from Penn.
I know that Alan Beghold said that he told the negotiators from Texas A&M that George couldn't possibly do research without a good library, and at that time there was simply nothing on classical archaeology in the Evans Library, nothing.
And they said that they would do whatever was necessary, and I think they even named a figure of up to $100,000.
It was also made very clear that I was not simply leaving Penn
changing jobs, that I was bringing an institute here, which would be affiliated but separate with its own board of directors, its own staff, and so forth.
And therefore, I wasn't a normal faculty member.
I was president of I&A, and I would report directly to the president of Texas A&M.
And I never met Jack Williams, I don't think, because he was in the hospital during most of this time.
And I may have met him once in a reception line or something, but I'm not sure I ever did.
It was mainly John Kelly and I dealt with.
Describe what it was like to work with Calhoun.
Working with John Calhoun was great.
He became a director of INA and we would drive together to Dallas for some of the board meetings.
Jay Llewellyn was, everyone was, was, was, you know, very good.
I met Joanne Treat for the first time because it was agreed that we would get our grants, those of us who were on the payroll at Texas A&M would get our grants through the Research Foundation.
The original arrangement was that Steffi and I, and we were bringing friend Bandornik in January because he wanted to give at least some notice to University of California Davis where he was then teaching classics, and he would join us, that we would all work two terms for the
for the university in one term for INA, but that in the summer that term would be paid for by the university.
And that's something Dave Maxwell insisted on.
Incidentally, I can't tell you the important role that Aidan Maxwell played in that first trip, in that February trip, February of, um, 75, because I still couldn't make up my mind at that time whether to go to the Harbor Branch Foundation or to come to Texas A&M, even after the $100,000 offer, because Harbor Branch Foundation also had tons of money and research ships and submarines and so forth.
And I remember we then sat at what was then called, very politically incorrectly, Sambo's Diner over across Texas Avenue, drinking cup of coffee after cup of coffee late into the night.
And he never pressured me, never pushed me.
He told me the advantages of being at a university.
But he finally, I remember his parting advice was just when you make up your mind, don't ever look back.
And so I made up my mind to come to Texas A&M and never looked back.
It was the best career move I could possibly have made, best thing that ever happened to this entire field.
Uh, the library now is, uh, they didn't just spend a hundred thousand.
They spent a hundred thousand buying one classical archaeology collection of about, um, uh, several, two or three, no, what was it, several thousand volumes.
Uh, Henry Robinson's library, he'd been director of the American School of Classical Studies at Athens.
And then they bought a 2,000-volume library of Egyptology for about $100,000.
They filled any gap I wanted them to with journals when I could find them in catalogs.
I did the searching.
I used to sit up at 2 and 3 in the morning, ever since I came here, going through secondhand book catalogs, trying to fill in the gaps.
And they've never, never hesitated to buy anything I wanted.
So when a noted person came here from, archaeologists came here from Australia, which has a wonderful tradition of classical archaeology at Sydney and Melbourne and so forth,
He went through our library and said, this is better than any library in Australia as far as archaeology goes.
And I've had other people say the same thing.
When we first came here, we used to drive over to Austin to use the library.
Now some of the students come over and use our books.
I'm not running theirs down, but they had a 75-year head start on us.
But we have now one of the finest libraries of classical archaeology in the country and in the world.
Shelly Waxman came on to our faculty from Israel.
He couldn't, you know, he thought coming to a place in the middle of Texas, and he just said it was better than any archaeological library in Israel.
It's a fantastic library.
I don't think people realize it.
Are there any people in the library that deserve a pat on the back for helping with that?
Every librarian I've worked with, I can't remember who was there before, um, the woman whose name, um, oh goodness.
My brain.
Yeah, okay.
They've all been good.
There was one man I especially enjoyed working with, and I have to think of his name in a few moments, because he was in charge of acquisitions for a while.
He's now dead.
But he led to my getting my chair here, I think.
I'll think of his name.
So A&M certainly kept the commitments that they made to you.
Oh, many times over.
Now, there was a question about how they could put a private institute on...
state property, and they didn't have room for us.
And so, while we were in Bolton Hall, that was just, I think for one term, they were fixing up an old barracks building out of the, what was then known as the Annex, it's now the Riverside Campus.
this Korean War air base and so the World Center for Underwood Archaeology for several years was started with one barracks building and Dick Steffi had his little shop at one end and that's our little library and we had offices, we had a classroom and in many ways
It was a wonderful era because we were like a family.
Once you drove all the way out there, there was nowhere to go.
So the students and the faculty, we ate together.
We were together from morning to night when we took off, which made us a family.
And I think that was very good.
But we did have to drive 11 miles every time we teach a class on campus.
We want to go to the library.
And very few students from the campus would come out and take our courses.
So the undergraduate courses that we taught, we would always teach on campus, of course.
So, Dave Maxwell played this major role, but he, for some reason, wanted to be sure that we were salaried by the university in the summers when we were essentially doing these I&A projects.
I don't know why.
I can't speak for him.
I've often wondered whether he thought, well, you know, here at Texas A&M, we'll pay them two-thirds of their salary every year, and then they'll do all this glamorous stuff and get on television in National Geographic, and they would be being paid.
I'm not sure he realized how incredibly loyal we've tried to be.
I will never, I mean, I've had to fight with television like ABC News, National Geographic Explorer, and National Geographic magazine.
They always say, oh, that's just too much.
Which one?
I said, no, I am from the Institute of Nautical Archaeology at Texas A&M University, and that's the way we sign things.
We don't ever say we're just from INA or we're just from Texas A&M.
And we think that at Texas A&M, it doesn't mean it's part of it, but people associate the two and so I think it's worked out well.
So we were out of the annex and then we got another building for Dick to have a model building shop and teaching his students.
I think one of the greatest things can ever be said about Texas A&M University.
When I came here, they said, okay, we will put you and Fry and then when Van Dornick gets away from the University of California at Davis on the faculty,
And then your I&E staff will be Steffi and Robin Piercy and Michael Katzeb, who was staying on in Greece.
And I said, no, you want Dick Steffi on the faculty.
He's a great lecturer, and he has this unique knowledge of ancient ship construction.
They did that.
And, of course, Dick became, as I say, the second, I think, MacArthur Fellow.
He has a very distinguished publishing career.
He has turned out people who are in such great demand around the world.
There's, um, he doesn't know it, but there's a feshrift being prepared in his honor by the greatest authorities in the world on ancient ships from, um, from Belgium, from New York University, from Cambridge, from everywhere.
He is revered.
But when he was put on the faculty here, he did not have a college degree.
I didn't know that.
He may have had a technical degree of some sort, but I mean he just, you know, he installed electrical systems in factories and billboards or whatever you do in Denver, Pennsylvania, and he would not have been allowed on any other faculty of most universities.
You know, they would sometimes hire a playwright or something like that, but, or an artist, but this was a violinist maybe, but this was very unusual.
And it really paid off because Dick's students worshipped him.
And as I say, they are now the people called on around the world whenever an ancient ship is, or not even ancient.
You ought to know who our alumni are now.
The head archaeologist of the U.S.
Navy, who is in charge of this Civil War submarine Hunley, he's one of Dick's students.
The head underwater archaeologist of Florida, who's doing 16th century records, one of our students.
the head underwater archaeologist of South Carolina is one of our students, and his chief assistant, the prior head of underwater archaeology of the state of Maryland, is one of our students.
And just last week, and I have no idea what he's going to do, one of our former students became the chief underwater archaeologist of Oklahoma.
I guess it's for lakes and rivers.
So, you know, we've sort of got a corner on the market for that sort of thing.
Now, so we started teaching here.
We uh, let in ten graduate students, and we didn't tell them, but we needed students so bad we just accepted the ten who applied, and congratulated each one for meeting our high standards.
And the first one to ever get his degree from us ended up a physician.
The second one to get an M.A.
from us, maybe it was an M.S.
in those days through geography, is now a top administrator, executive in a large computer firm.
So they don't all stay in nautical archaeology, but that's one of the beauties that I'm going to talk about at the commencement address of liberal arts.
It's a good foundation for almost anything you want to do.
We want to keep this very, very upbeat and pleasant.
I would say that there was an understandable
I don't want to use a word as strong as resentment or what, but here's a faculty of anthropology who have worked very hard to get where they are.
It was a new department.
It was only a couple of years ago.
Vaughn Bryant was the first department chairman they'd ever had.
So I think it caused a strain on them
Suddenly, without them having any say in it, I mean, usually when you hire a colleague, you have faculty meetings, you have worldwide surges, and suddenly thrust into their midst are three people they knew nothing about, Stephanie Van Dornik and myself.
We were well paid, and they knew that we only had to teach one term a year.
they didn't realize that was because I'd raised private money for the other terms probably, but I think that this, I would just put it in, it made a strain between the nautical archaeologists and the straight anthropologists when we came here.
I think that that strain is now healed.
I think we're getting along just fine, but it was part of the growing process to have that.
Describe your
your official INA organizational structure.
What officers and board
Part of the terms of affiliation, and incidentally, if you're interested in this, when I stepped down as program head or at some point in the last few years, I wrote a history of all this because I was afraid that otherwise people wouldn't know.
For example, when Fred Hocker on the faculty became president of Texas A&M, he got chewed out by the dean because he went straight to the president about something.
Well, that was the way it was to be done.
I mean, you put on your INA hat as president and then you took it off and you put on your
you know, uh, at that time he was just an assistant professor so I can imagine that this was very upsetting to Dean that, you know, they could just pick up the phone and say, Ray, you know, uh, I want to ask you a question.
But we've never taken advantage of that.
Um... You had a board.
We had a board and the agreement with there would always be three members of Texas A&M on the board.
So I guess the first were, uh, John Calhoun, uh, Jay Llewellyn, and fairly early on, I don't know whether he was one of the first,
was one of my best friends in town, Bob Walker, who has been on the board ever since.
How many other board members were there?
In those days we probably had a board of fifteen or twenty maybe.
Now it's over thirty.
And normally the board meets?
The board at that time meant twice a year.
Now it meets once a year usually.
When I first formed the board there were several academics on it and when we came to Texas A&M I politely suggested they might all resign because we were still so strapped with funds that when we met on the East Coast people would just drive there.
But suddenly we had to pay to fly people out from Brown and the University of North Carolina and the University of New Hampshire
And if they had to rent a car, we had to pay for that.
We'd have to put them up in a hotel, and we'd have to pay for their meals.
And we were still a very struggling young organization.
I mean, we had, you know, $50,000 a year.
And who were the, once you got to A&M, who were the primary contributors?
uh, sources of funding for.
The, the, uh, Jack Kelly, uh, was able to get, uh, some of his friends in Oklahoma, so I would say more of my money came from Tulsa, and still made than anywhere else.
Uh, he got Ray Siegfried, uh, Bob Lorton, uh, later Lou Ward out of Enid.
Uh, in fact at one point he got onto the board, um, the person who became chairman of the board,
And that man was such a loyal Aggie as well as being such a loyal member of INA and he was flying down to have dinner with Ann and me with his wife when he crashed his own plane and was killed and that was, I'm having one of these senior lapses.
I know his name as well as my own.
Richard Williford.
Williford.
And he was actually at one point I think president of the Texas A&M Foundation.
But he became chairman of our board and was going to start a huge endowment drive.
And as I say, he was flying down to have dinner with Ann and me.
But this was many years after we came here.
This was maybe six years ago or something like that.
So when we first came here, the money was coming from Jack Kelly, his friends, John Baird still.
John Brown Cook died, but his widow, Marion Cook, took his place on our board.
And then we added some people in Fort Worth.
We added Harlan Crow from Dallas.
We added Frank Darden from Fort Worth.
And the first board meeting we ever had to show how we were going, we put people up here in one of the local hotels.
I don't know if the Hilton was even, I doubt if the Hilton was here.
No, it was Aggieland Inn.
Um, so they had to carry their own luggage to their rooms, you know, including these grand dames, uh, from, uh, but at any rate, and our board dinner was Ann in our house with almost no furniture, because we'd, we'd just moved there a few months before, cooked a dinner, and people went around in buffet style, ate off their laps, and then we met in, um, out of the annex with linoleum floor, and we did that a couple of years, and then one day Jack Kelly said, George,
said, I don't know how to say this without hurting your feelings, because I just want to say the right thing.
We went to Tom's barbecue for lunch.
And I mean, some of these people thought it was fun, but some of them, I think, didn't.
In fact, I know one of them didn't.
They were used to being pampered, some of these people, with great deals of money.
So Jack said, George,
These people come from around the world.
Some of them were coming from, you know, from abroad even and from all over the country.
And they're used to being pampered.
And I don't know exactly how to put it in words, but the meeting was more like a high school library committee meeting.
So we decided to do it up from there.
And so ever since then, with almost no exceptions, we've met in the mansion in Dallas, which is one of the finest hotels in the world and obviously very expensive.
We have now very lavish dinners and luncheons and have two-day meetings now.
And it turns out that Jack Kelly was absolutely right.
We get incredible attendance.
Whenever we've tried to go somewhere else, even when we met once in the National Geographic,
boardroom, something they would never usually give, but they like me and so forth, and they say we could meet in their board.
We did not have a quorum.
Whereas when it's in Dallas, unless people are ill, they all show up with their wives or husbands.
So Jack was right, people like to be, you know, live first class if they're going to.
So fundings come from private individuals, any government or foundations?
We have always, from the beginning, we've got money from the National Endowment for the Humanities, which has helped pay for some of our salaries.
For example, if I have a three-month excavation in Turkey, I will put into that the summer salaries of the I&A staff who are not paid by Texas A&M, although they are paid, most of them, through Texas A&M, so they can get the right fringe benefits.
Uh, so that even somebody, even some of our Turks, who have only come to America maybe once in two years, are actually Texas A&M employees.
Uh, now, the, the, the idea about, uh, as we expanded out of the annex, going from open, one after another after another, and in the meantime, they said we'd hire a New World Archaeologist.
Uh, they held good on that.
The one, the job that Carl Clausen should have had, if Eddie joined us.
And so we had a search, and Fred Van Dornik and I invited Donny Hamilton,
from the University of Texas at Austin who ran their conservation lab over.
We thought he gave a wonderful talk on the 1554 fleet which he had conserved.
and done a lot of the research on.
And so we hired him.
So he was a fourth member of our faculty.
So he got another barracks building, which he made into a conservation lab, except he got another one.
And then we eventually got, I think, one more just for extra office space.
For example, when Ed Duran retired from geography, we gave him an office out there.
And he taught part time for, I guess, another year, because he taught far eastern seafaring, which none of us was competent to do.
But how we arranged, this was an important one.
They said, how can we put a private organization on state property?
And finally, I suggested, look, when Texas A&M faculty and students come to Turkey or go to Mombasa or go to Maine, they're being fed, housed, and equipped totally by INA.
And so why don't we just make it an absolutely fair swap.
We won't charge for any of our facilities in Turkey, and you won't charge for ours, and we'll never try to work it out on a penny equal basis, but it'll work out.
And I think it has.
And in Turkey, as you may not know, we, from a small, one flat of a rented house, where 18 of us share one bathroom, we now have there a small campus with beautiful neo-Ottoman stone buildings,
We have an office building.
We have a two-wing dorm.